# Node.js Express Starter Project Structure

This Node.js Express starter project is designed to provide a scalable and organized foundation for building web applications. Below is a detailed explanation of the project's folder structure and the purpose of each component.

## Folder Structure and Contents

- `.env` & `.env.sample`: Environment configuration files. `.env` is ignored by git for security reasons and stores sensitive information such as database credentials. `.env.sample` provides a template for setting up your own `.env` file.
- `.gitignore`: Specifies intentionally untracked files to ignore.
- `bun.lockb`: A lock file for [Bun](https://bun.sh/), similar to `package-lock.json` for npm, ensuring consistent installations across machines.
- `combined.log`: A file generated by Winston for logging. It's ignored by git as specified in `.gitignore`.
- `package.json`: Describes the project's metadata, dependencies, and scripts for running the application and development tasks.
- `src/`: The source directory containing the application's codebase.
  - `config/`: Configuration files for the application.
    - `index.js`: Central export point for configuration files.
    - `logger_config.js`: Configuration for the Winston logger.
    - `server_config.js`: Server configuration, including port settings.
  - `controllers/`: Controllers handle incoming HTTP requests and send responses.
    - `index.js`: Central export point for controllers.
    - `info_controller.js`: An example controller that provides application information.
  - `middlewares/`: Express middlewares for request processing.
    - `index.js`: Central export point for middlewares.
  - `repositories/`: Data access layers for interacting with databases or external services.
    - `index.js`: Central export point for repositories.
  - `routes/`: Route definitions for the application.
    - `index.js`: Central export point for versioned API routes.
    - `v1/`: Version 1 of the API routes.
      - `index.js`: Defines version 1 routes and links them to controllers.
  - `services/`: Business logic services.
    - `index.js`: Central export point for services.
  - `utils/`: Utility functions and helpers.
    - `index.js`: Central export point for utility functions.
  - `index.js`: The entry point of the application. Initializes the Express app and includes global middleware and routes.

## Key Components

- **Express**: The core framework used to build the web server.
- **Dotenv**: Loads environment variables from the `.env` file into `process.env`.
- **Winston**: A logging library configured to output logs to both the console and the `combined.log` file.
- **HTTP Status Codes**: Utilized for meaningful HTTP response status codes.

This structure is designed to promote modularity and separation of concerns, making the application easier to maintain and scale.

## Getting Started

To get this Node.js Express application running on your local machine, follow these steps:

### Prerequisites

- Ensure you have Node.js installed on your machine. You can download it from [Node.js official website](https://nodejs.org/).

### Installation

1. Clone the repository to your local machine:

```sh
git clone https://github.com/mohithnd/nodejs-express-starter-template
cd nodejs-express-starter
```

2. Install the dependencies:

```sh
npm install
```

3. Copy the `.env.sample` file to `.env` and update it with your specific configurations:

```sh
cp .env.sample .env
```
